JaCoP - Java Constraint Programming Solver

JaCoP solver is Java-based open source solver developed and maintained
mainly by two people Krzysztof Kuchcinski - Dept. of Computer Science,
Lund University, Sweden, and Radoslaw Szymanek - EPFL, Switzerland.
Moreover a number of students have contributed to the solver by
programming first versions of different global constraints and set
constraints. The solver is being used in academia for research and
teaching as well as in industry for commercial purposes. The most
successful use of the solver is within Electronic Design Automation
community, since both main authors come from that community.

JaCoP provides a significant number of constraints to facilitate
modeling as well as modular design of search. This allows to tailor
search to characteristics of the problem being addressed. It has
currently more than 90,000 lines of code, not including examples and
testing code. The examples which are the preferred way to document the
abilities of JaCoP have more than 20.000 lines of code. The core
developers have been working on JaCoP for past 10 years during their
free time as a hobby activity. It has been refactored, transformed,
and improved many times. Initial versions of JaCoP were even 3 orders
of magnitude slower than the current version. JaCoP implementation has
been influenced heavily by more than 20 research articles. Moreover,
JaCoP was used as a tool to conduct experiments for CP
publications. JaCoP supports finite domains of integers and sets of
integers.

The major focus of JaCoP are its constraints. These constraints
include rich set of primitive, logical, and conditional constraints as
well as many global constraints. The most important global constraints
are as follows.

- diff2, 
- cumulative, 
- alldifferent (with bounds consistency and complete algorithm based
  on Régin's algorithm),
- gcc, 
- extensional support (with three different state-of-the-art approaches)
  and extensional conflict,
- among,
- element, 
- circuit,
- knapsack, 
- regular,
- netflow, and 
- geost.

JaCoP solver contains also front-end for FlatZinc language that makes
it possible to execute MiniZinc models. It allows us to perform extensive
testing with the help of other solvers as we can compare results from 
different solvers. 

JaCoP is an ongoing activity. Every half a year we release additional
functionality. The most recent additions is a network flow constraint
which helps greatly in modeling and taking advantage of network-flow
like structure in the problems. We are already working on implementation 
of Java standard for CP (JSR-331), as well as have plans to connect JaCoP 
to CP-viz platform. We are always willing to help JaCoP users to extend 
JaCoP functionality if it helps in improving its modelling and solving 
capabilities. 
