JaCoP - Java Constraint Programming Solver

JaCoP solver is Java-based open source solver developed and maintained
mainly by two people Krzysztof Kuchcinski - Dept. of Computer Science,
Lund University, Sweden, and Radoslaw Szymanek - Crossing-Tech,
Switzerland/Vistula University, Poland.
 
Moreover a number of students have contributed to the solver by
programming first versions of different global constraints and set
constraints. The solver is being used in academia for research and
teaching as well as in industry for commercial purposes. The most
successful use of the solver is within Electronic Design Automation
community, since both main authors come from that community.

JaCoP supports finite domains of integers and sets of integers as well
as floating-point domain.  It offers a significant number of primitive
and global constraints on these variables to facilitate modeling as
well as modular design of search. This allows to tailor search to
characteristics of the problem being addressed. It has currently more
than 100,000 lines of code, not including examples and testing
code. The examples which are the preferred way to document the
abilities of JaCoP have more than 20.000 lines of code. The core
developers have been working on JaCoP for past 10 years during their
free time as a hobby activity. It has been refactored, transformed,
and improved many times. Initial versions of JaCoP were even 3 orders
of magnitude slower than the current version. JaCoP implementation has
been influenced heavily by more than 20 research articles. Moreover,
JaCoP was used as a tool to conduct experiments for CP publications.

The major focus of JaCoP are its constraints. These constraints
include rich set of primitive, logical, and conditional constraints as
well as many global constraints. The most important global constraints
are as follows.

- diff2, 
- cumulative, 
- alldifferent (with bounds consistency and complete algorithm based
  on Régin's algorithm),
- gcc, 
- extensional support (with three different state-of-the-art approaches)
  and extensional conflict,
- among,
- element, 
- circuit and subcircuit,
- knapsack, 
- binpacking,
- regular,
- netflow, and 
- geost.


JaCoP solver can be used directly from Java but it has several
front-ends. It has FlatZinc language interface that makes it possible
to execute MiniZinc models. It allows us to perform extensive testing
with the help of other solvers as we can compare results from
different solvers.  It has also Scala based domain-specific language
so it is easier to create your own constraint programs even in more
intuitive manner. 

